feat: Add ADR for service catalog entity mapping (#109)
operate-first/blueprint: adr/0021-rules-for-entity-mapping-in-service-catalog.md

# Rules for entity mapping in Service Catalog

* Status: Proposed
* Deciders: mimotej, SamoKopecky, tumido
* Date: 2022-07-26

## Context and Problem Statement

> Backstage offers multiple resource types which can be used to represent entities and their relations in service catalog. We need to have a set of rules present in Operate First which will provide context and guidance on how entities are mapped to Backstage resources.

Reviewer: I think we should call the "resource types" "entity types" since they are called like that in the [backstage documentation](https://backstage.io/docs/features/software-catalog/descriptor-format#overall-shape-of-an-entity). I can also see the name "resource" being a bit confusing because right now there is a resource that has the `Kind: Resource`.

> Backstage offers multiple resource types which can be used to represent entities and their relations in service catalog. We need to have a set of rules present in Operate First which will provide context and guidance on how entities are mapped to Backstage resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Backstage offers multiple resource types which can be used to represent entities and their relations in a service catalog. We need to have a set of rules present in Operate First that will provide context and guidance on how entities are mapped to Backstage resources.
```

I think here should be either `a` or `the` also I think in this context there should be `that` instead of `which`

## Decision Drivers

* Easy and clear guidelines and distinction for each resource type.

> * Supports various caveats  like ODH meta operators and Cluster as a service/resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Supports various caveats like ODH meta operators and Cluster as a service/resource.
```
Extra space.

## Decision Outcome

[Backstage provides](https://backstage.io/docs/features/software-catalog/descriptor-format) numerous resource types, which has strictly defined relations.

```mermaid
erDiagram
Domain ||--o{ System : contains
System ||--o{ Component : contains
Component |o--o{ Component : hasSubcomponent
Component |o--o{ Component : dependsOn
Component ||--o{ Resource : requires
Component ||--o{ API : provides
Component }|--|| API : consumes
Resource ||--o{ Component : dependsOn
Resource ||--o{ Resource : dependsOn
Location
Template
Group |o--|{ User : hasMember
Group |o--|{ Group : hasMember
```

Relations are generated from resource manifests. Extensive documentation on all supported and recognized relations is available [upstream][3].

Additionally:

`Group` and `User` resources own any other resource type. All resources except `Group`, `User` and `Location` is required to have an owner specified.

### Kind: Domain

> This entity represents top level non-root entity within the cloud. Think of it as a SIG type of entity. A whole collection of applications or group of services that are meant to work together and be used together.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This entity represents a top-level non-root entity within the cloud. Think of it as a SIG type of entity. A whole collection of applications or group of services that are meant to work together and be used together.
```

Examples:

* **SRE Domain**: Contains all monitoring applications, CI/CD etc, Service Catalog, etc.
* **Data Science Domain**: Contains ODH and, Kubeflow, Data cataloging solutions and other analytics tools.
* **Thoth Station Domain**: All Thoth related systems including repository storages like Pulp, everything supporting Thoth.

`Domain` owns multiple `System`s.

### Kind: System

> System means a collection of applications, components which together builds a singular service. A system is meant as an interaction point for users as an application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
System means a collection of applications and components that build a singular service. A system is meant as an interaction point for users as an application.
```
This sentence is harder to understand. This wording might make it clearer WDYT?

Examples:

* **Service Catalog System**: Represents Backstage as a whole.
* **ODH System**: Represents ODH as a collection of its components.
* **ArgoCD System**
* **Prow System**: Contains all Prow components like Deck, Crier, Horologium, etc.

`System` resource belongs to a one domain. `System` resource owns `Component` resources.

If there are multiple instances of the same service system, either for different maturity level environments (staging/production) or intended to different audiences (ODH in Smaug and ODH in OS Climate) the System or Component resources need to be duplicated.

### Kind: Component

> Individual service, a runtime, component. Usually describes an individual deployment. A component should map to

Reviewer: I don't think the sentence is finished here or are you referring to the examples below?

> Open Data Hub is described as a `System` resource in Data Science `Domain`. Due to lack of intermediate resource types in Backstage, all the applications within Open Data Hub, like Superset, JupyterHub, Argo Workflows, etc. are described as `Component` resources. These resources have subcomponents (specified as `Component` resources with the [`.spec.subcomponentOf` field](https://backstage.io/docs/features/software-catalog/descriptor-format#specsubcomponentof-optional) specified) which finally map to individual deployments

* **JupyterHub Component**
* **JupyterHub Controller subcomponent** `Component` resource
* **Idle culler subcomponent** `Component` resource

The `Component` resource requires a [`.spec.type` field](https://backstage.io/docs/features/software-catalog/descriptor-format#spectype-required) to be specified. While any arbitrary value is allowed here, we recognize following main types:

* `service`: Any backend-like application, API provider, bot
* `website`: Has to provide frontend web interface
* `library`: Provides a library or any sort of code base dependency
* `template`: Is used as a repository or service template

### Kind: API

> If a component is a backend service, it may expose an API intended to be consumed by others. Each exposed API should provide an definition, either statically or dynamically. Backstage [requires us to specify](https://backstage.io/docs/features/software-catalog/descriptor-format#kind-api) `.spec.definition` and `.spec.type` fields. Definition should reflect selected type. Additionally `.spec.definition` can directly describe the api verbatim or can reference remote or service provided dynamic API definitions through supported [substitution modifiers](https://backstage.io/docs/features/software-catalog/descriptor-format#substitutions-in-the-descriptor-format).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a component is a backend service, it may expose an API intended to be consumed by others. Each exposed API should provide an definition, either statically or dynamically. Backstage [requires us to specify](https://backstage.io/docs/features/software-catalog/descriptor-format#kind-api) `.spec.definition` and `.spec.type` fields. Definition should reflect selected type. Additionally `.spec.definition` can directly describe the API verbatim or can reference remote or service provided dynamic API definitions through supported [substitution modifiers](https://backstage.io/docs/features/software-catalog/descriptor-format#substitutions-in-the-descriptor-format).
```

### Kind: Resource

> This resource type represents any other type of dependency of a `Component`. It can be an object bucket, cluster where the workload is hosted at, etc. Any external dependency that the service relies on.

Reviewer: Maybe we can also add that the `.spec.type` filed is required and provide some common values like the `Kind: Component`?
```suggestion
This resource type represents any other type of dependency of a `Component`. It can be an object where the workload is hosted at. Any external dependency that the service relies on. It also requireds a [`.spec.type` field](https://backstage.io/docs/features/software-catalog/descriptor-format#spectype-required-4) to be specified. We recognize following main types:
* `database`: A database system that the component depends on
* `s3-bucket`: AWS S3 bucket storage
* `cluster`: OpenShift or Kuberntes cluster
```

### Kind: User

Represents individual users.

### Kind: Group

Represents group of users or teams. Composable unit of organization and people structure. Groups should represent individual service owners and contact points.

### Kind: Template

In Backstage this is used for interactive forms. Since all our configuration is declarative, we don't plan on using this resource.

### Kind: Location

> Backstage provides this resource type to allow you to extend catalog from other locations. Since all our catalog is co-located in a single place, we don't plan on using this resource.

Reviewer: We are actually using `Kind: Location` [here](https://github.com/operate-first/apps/blob/master/service-catalog/all.yaml) and so the end of the sentence seems a bit misleading.
```suggestion
Backstage provides this resource type to allow you to extend catalog from other locations. Since our catalog is co-located in a single place, we don't plan on using this resource to reference locations other then the repository that defines the catalog.
```

## Additional notes

### Annotations

> Individual resource types support various annotations which allows users to enable certain plugins and features. To understand supported annotations, users should refer to our service catalog [documentation][1] and [upstream documentation on annotations][2].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Individual resource types support various annotations, which allow users to enable certain plugins and features. To understand supported annotations, users should refer to our service catalog [documentation][1] and [upstream documentation on annotations][2].
```
